You know what? Progamming is fucking hard.

I've been teaching the web development course to first year computer scientists for the past four years. It's difficult. And these are smart students. Once they get their heads around it they can run a mental mile in 5 seconds flat. They ask insightful questions. They learn, frankly, fuck-off fast. But it's still hard. It's easy to forget how hard it is to learn programming when you've been doing it for most of your life. My first experiences with programming were playing around with Flash MX trying to replicate the amazing things I saw on the internet. In Flash the IDE gave you tools that let you move things frame by frame or in 'tweens', effectively letting Flash determine the frames for you. I wanted to make games. So when I wanted to move things from one side of the screen to the other I would plot tweens and I would manually step through the frames because thats all I knew. Thats the most convoluted way to do it but that's all I knew. When I eventually found out how to set the x, y and *eventually z* position - it blew my tiny mind. Programming languages don't teach you how to do things better - if you're lucky they'll tell you what you are doing wrong. Writing good code takes expert input or a hell of a lot of false starts. 

Maybe nowadays it's easier to learn a language. Maybe. But my experience from trying to teach programming has shown it's still incredibly obscure. As practiced programmers we know how to what to google, we know to skip right past the question on Stack Overflow, we know how to pick out the signal from the noise. And that all takes practice. These things aren't obvious as beginners. Programming is hard because there is so much that you have to learn that no one thinks has to be taught.

I've been fortunate to teach hundreds of students over the course of my PhD. I'm proud of so many of them and I'm so glad I had the opportunity to point them in the right direction when I could. I have no doubt, if they get the input from experts I was lucky enough to receive they will be brilliant. I hope that next time you meet a beginner you shove them in the right direction, if not for them then for you.