---
layout: post
title: Austria
category: food
---
Camels, Sturm, Vienna, Grown men on scooters, Sturm chasing

## Melk
Melk is a tiny town but nice enough and the abbey is well worth a look if you are in the area. You can walk through the good parts of the town in a morning if you want to see it. Start at the abbey and work your way down the hill until you get to the town courtyard.

Melk Abbey - An incredibly ornate Baroque church with an amazing history that dates back almost 1000 years. Originally a palace, it became an an abbey after it was given to monks to care for after the royals living there moved out. Since then it's had an amazing history and has . It's €7.50 for entrance and a tour with a student card or a little cheaper at €5.50 without the tour. The tours are available in English at certain times so check at the ticket office when you arrive to see when the next tour starts.
### Where to go

## Vienna
Vienna is a beautiful city with some amazing buildings, great places to eat and grown men on scooters for some reason.

### Food and Drink
Figlmüller Wollzeile - Classic Viennese restaurant with good food, a nice atmosphere and professional if grumpy service. The prices are reasonable; a very good, very large (~30cm) pork schnitzel, some fancy potatoes and a glass of Grüner Veltiner set me back just short of €20. I was lucky enough to turn up to an empty table restaurant but it got very busy so if you are determined to go then you'll need to reserve a table. It's worth noting that there are two Figlmüllers very close to each other, one on Wollzeile that I visited and another on Bäckerstraße, with different menu's. Importantly only the Bäckerstraße restaurant sells beer or Wiener Schnitzel i.e. veal not pork.
Wollzeile 5
11:00 - 22:30, every day
http://www.figlmueller.at/en/

Wiener Deewan - A unique restaurant in Vienna Winer Deewan offers an open buffet of Pakistani cuisine where you decide how much to pay. There is no set menu but always a variety of meat and veg dishes and a rice or bread accompaniment. The food was good quality but not exceptional, I found it lacking much kick though I suspect I was not adventurous enough with the sauces. The restaurant is very laid back and it is easy to strike up a conversation with just about anyone. I sat myself across from a regular who had also come alone and picked up a few tips on Vienna as well as some advice on how much to spend. For the 3 plates I enjoyed I spent €5, a very good price for a big city. It's definitly worth a visit; the great part of the pay as you wish idea is if you find yourself not completely satisified it doesn't need to put a big dent in your funds. The only exception is drinks and the takeaway meals which both have a set price.
Liechtensteinstraße 10
11:00 - 23:00, Mon - Sat
http://www.deewan.at/

#### Heurigers
 - 
 - 
 - 
 
### Entertainment
Natural History Museum - 

Spanish Riding School - Very old riding stables in the heart of Vienna's first district with some very skilled riders and horses. They train in classical dressage and are famous for enabling horses to complete "airs above the ground" i.e. jumps, hops, balancing on it's haunches. You can watch them train most mornings for €10 with a student card or go to a performance for much more. I found the training interesting but they just do basic exercises in training and not often the famous movements so it does get boring. They train for around 2 hours from 10:00 but it's a stop on some of the coach holidays and the queues to get in start to get very long from 9:40. You can save yourself alot of time if you go to the main entrance to buy a ticket (there are two queues at the main entrance, one to buy a ticket and the other to get in) then turn around and take the first right to the back entrance of the school where the queue to get in is usually much shorter. Alternatively, but I am not certain on this, you may be able to buy a ticket and then turn up after it has started later once people have started to leave and grab a better seat without having to queue. 2 hours is a very long time to sit and watch people train so many people had already left by 11:00. A ticket to watch the morning exercises was .
Michaelerplatz 1
Morning exercises 10:00 - 12:00, Tue - Fri
http://www.srs.at

Schönbrunn Palace - A beautiful palace a little way out of the city center but very easily accessible from the U-Bahn. On the way in there are loads of signs trying to convince you to buy packages but ignore them and head straight on and to the right into the gardens which you can explore for free and for me are the real reason to visit. You step around a corner and are blown away by some fantastic sight line that has been laid out in front of you. Whether it is the magnificence of the gloriette from the palace or the alien design of the palm house it is a surprisingly interesting place to explore. You need to pay to visit many of the buildings and outside of the ticket office and zoo you will need cash as they have no card reader.
Schönbrunner Schloßstraße 47
8:30 - 17:30, every day
http://www.schoenbrunn.at/

Schönbrunn Zoo - On the same site as the palace, this is a well presented zoo with a variety of animals and the oldest zoo in the world. Most of the information on the animals is in English and German and there is a place to get food in the middle. It has some rare animals and is one of the few zoos in the world you can see giant pandas. Overall it is interesting but the entrance fee is very steep at €16.50 and for me it was not good value for money. I did not time my visit well but if you are organised try and arrive in time to see one of the feedings that tend to start in the afternoon.
Maxingstraße 13b
9:00 - 18:30, every day
https://www.zoovienna.at

English Cinema Haydn - Good little cinema showing current films in English and without subtitles. For the film I went to see most of the seats where already gone 10 minutes before it was supposed to start so you will have to get there early (or reserve online) if you want a good seat or are in a large group. It's a short walk from Neubaugasse metro station just before Sankt Mariahilf church.
Mariahilfer Strasse 57
http://www.haydnkino.at