---
layout: post
title: Thailand, Laos and Vietnam
excerpt: A short stint in South East Asia
category: travel
tags: [travel, backpacking]
---

Thread some of the culture in
- Bowing when greeting people
- Losing face
- Tight knit culture. Everyone helps everyone out. Passing tourists to friends. One way benefit as you aren't important as your not part of the culture/transient
- You can't join the culture so there is a separation of locals and foreigners that can't be crossed
- Expats were often very helpful and went out of their way to be helpfu
- Makes it more acceptable to exploit foreigners
- Group greed that's unsustainable

The woman who ran the clinic wasn't gleeful at the sight of the money she would make from the unconcious young woman. She was concerned.

More, faster and higher yields so older tourists. Greedily eats up the architecture, and landscape and culture. At times it's like moving down a conveyor belt. Designed to optimally separate you from your money.

## Bangkok

### 'Kev'
The airconditioned carriage of the airport rail link rolled up to the platform. The doors opened and we stepped into a wall of hot, clammy air. I started sweating immediately. The platform looked out onto a mess of buildings, many oozing moss and cracking from disrepair. Tall and unfamiliar trees with masses of soft leaves burst through the concrete below. Me and my friend and travel companion Sam had just arrived in Bangkok.

We met 'Kev' just under the platform smoking a cigarette next to a busy road. He was a short man with black hair and was dressed in a worn blue uniform. He approached us in a friendly manner and asked lots of questions. "Where are you from?", "Where are you staying?", "Is this your first day in Bangkok?". Within minutes of meeting him he'd retrieved a map from his back pocket and planned out our stay in Bangkok and onwards down to the full moon party in Koh Phangan. He even waved down a passing tuk-tuk to take us on a tour around the city.

He seemed dissapointed when we thanked him but asked if he knew somewhere we could get something to eat instead. He laughed and pointed to a large warehouse straight opposite us. Leaving Kev behind, we approached the river of metal three lanes wide that separated us and a meal and waited for an opening so we could cross.

...and waited...

...and waited...

...and gave up and had to ask Kev if he could help us cross the road.

The trick as it turns out is just to walk out straight into the traffic and most of it will find it's way around you and the rest, hopefully, stops. Inside the wide room several tables were laid out in a grid under fluorescent lights. A lizard scuttered over the concrete floor. To one side the noise of the street outside drifted in through the open window whilst the other side seveal stalls fought back with hot oil spitting furiously at meat and noodles as they are thrown into the pan and spatulas scraping sharply against woks. We followed Kev inside and looked at the sign above the nearest stall only to realise that it was only in Thai and I couldn't even begin to guess what they were selling. Kev came to the rescue again and bought us each a tasty mess of soft noodles, ferociously spicy with an unexpectedly coarse texture - the first of many Pad Thai. He talked at us about his interests - drinking, smoking, gambling and late nights out clubbing and about working in Ireland and how cheap Thai prostitutes are compared to European ones. Despite our many efforts he wouldn't let us pay for anything; saying that it hardly cost him anything at all.

After we'd finished eating we headed back outside. Kev reminded us again of the route he had planned out and pointed us to another tuk-tuk that had conveniently pulled over whilst we were talking. When we thanked him for the meal but declined again his demeanour cracked alarmingly. His smiling, intensely friendly face had slipped away revealing something equally intense but alot less friendly. Trying not to notice I just smiled, we thanked him again and walked swiftly away. Moments later we were lost.

### Somewhere in Bangkok
The street was wild and varied. Insulated wires hung like vines between concrete pylons in the street. Lanes of colourful traffic poured down wide roads. Agile motorbikes cut in front of their slower tuk tuk cousins which slowly forced their way though with horns blaring. Brightly coloured taxis stood at a stand still and the skytrain thundered overhead. The city seemed overgrown with vehicles and buildings and people.

We tried referencing the map Kev had given but aside from his annotations for the Thai words for 'hello', 'thank you' and 'big breasts' there was nothing on it of any use. Irritatingly every time we opened the map a taxi driver would immediately drive up the curb and yell and gesture at us to get in. I wasn't keen on getting a taxi anyway but the pushy tactics just pushed me away further. Then we passed a some groups of men and their motorbikes. They wore balaclavas so that you could only see their eyes following you as you walk by. I tried to not stand out - a tricky thing to do with a 70L backpack on your shoulders, halfway across the world from home - and realised quite how exposed we were carrying our lives for the next 6 weeks in our bags and completely lost. So we lured a taxi over, paid the fare and our car set off slowly towards our hostel.

### Tourist attractions
We didn't have much time in Bangkok so we started with the major tourist attractions like the Grand Palace. I don't think either of us were too keen on seeing them in the first place but we went because everyone had and we were worried we might find out later we'd missed out on something. It is generally more polite to cover your sholders and your knees when in Thailand. Sometimes you'll get slightly better service than otherwise but at the Grand Palace a guard enforces you dress correctly. So we ended up queuing 4 times: to rent some trousers, get our bags checked, buy a ticket and finally enter. There are actually two queues at the entrance. One for Thai people and another for everyone else. The local queue is free which seems sort of fair as the tickets were much more than anyone on the average Thai salary could justify.

The entrance is built into an old gate with the ticket stand a little way behind in another more recent looking building. With the big rotating gates and staff standing around it felt more like the entrance to a theme park than a royal palace. But stepping inside I was struck by the variety and detail of the buildings that surrounded me. The site is drenched in colour. Dripping from the golden spires down the tiles that cover the roofs and columns leaving the walls a glistening white. The buildings taper upwards as if they are trying to lift off the ground, their tall spires reaching out trying to poke holes in the clouds. In a sea of colour one of the most striking buildings is almost completely white. It all comes together into a dazzling spectacle. It's very well maintained too. I didn't see a tile out of place anywhere. In fact I found it impossible to say from looking if a building was put there hundreds of years ago or yesterday. And there is no information provided anywhere to relate to what your seeing. There's bins, electronic lights, sun shelters and hundreds of people but no context or stories about the palace. The only signs around are those that direct you to the exit. So whilst stunning at first without something to ground the buildings in they quickly lose their weight and impact. They may as well just float off into the sky like they seem to want to.

The other tourist attractions that we saw were much the same - impressive at first but lacking any staying power. They are great to take photos of, or photos in front of, and not alot else.

### Exploring
Luckily Bangkok is enormously varied so though the tourist attractions did nothing for me the various snippets of the city we saw as we roamed between them did. We went looking for a bar one afternoon and stumbled upon a quiet residential area. Rows of small houses stood like reeds next to a river. Only a simple arched bridge crossed over it. Smoke billowed down the street from scrappy bbqs serving flowery white fish on long skewers and rows of sticky meatballs. Nearby, people sat on plastic chairs talking to each other and playing cards. We went over the bridge and down an alley and were in a different city altogether. Here the buildings had grown tall and modern and a straight road ran through them with mopeds zipping along it. Open fronted restaurants were serving every kind of food you might fancy but few were stopping to eat just yet. If you followed that road a while you might meet a dead end but you could be just as likely to find a bustling market or a quiet park or a roaring stadium or anything else for that matter.

You could find anything you want to eat in Bangkok if you knew where to look. We didn't but still stumbled upon some extraordinary food. As expected we ate some excellent Pad Thai and every kind of Thai curry aswell as lots more things that I have no idea what were which were still pretty good. Yet one of the best things I ate whilst I was there was some toast. The toast in our hostels breakfast was weirdly good. You get massively thick slices of a slightly sweet bread with just the right amount of crunch to it. Finely crafted toast must be a Bangkok thing as we later found a restaurant which only sold toast with various toppings. It was packed out. We didn't have time to try out that restaurant and I didn't find toast that good in the rest of Thailand so it's worth grabbing some if your passing through Bangkok.

It can't all be that good though and you'll often find someone preparing a big, spiky durian fruit. People working at stalls cut up the huge fruit into chunks and sell it in a polystyrene tray wrapped in clingfilm. They don't need to advertise it much as you'll smell it long before you see it and it sits in your nose far longer than seems fair. It has a distinct taste. It's not actually bad at first but it so thoroughly confused my pallet that I could only manage a few bites. The after taste is grim though. It's something like rotting garlic. Still worth a go. Trying durian fruit for the first time is the pallete equivalent of seeing a new colour.

### Trust
Roaming about people often try and take advantage of your ignorance. Haggling is essential as everyone assumes you don't know the true value of anything in Thailand and so will open with as much as they think they can get away with. Once we got familiar with the taxis we found out we'd paid roughly 5 times as much for our journey up front than we would have if we'd gone on the meter. Even once you know how much something should cost you still have to haggle hard to get close to that point as most people expect you to pay more as a tourist. The closer to the tourist attractions we got the worse this became with some people getting frustrated and angry if you weren't willing to pay well over the odds. Haggling quickly became a hassle to be avoided wherever possible.

The worst for it are the many scammers who completely erode your trust in anyone who speaks english outside of a hostel. They often appear friendly and come out of the blue and start a conversation. They usually speak flawless english and after a short chat will kindly let you know that whatever big tourist attraction you've come to see is closed today but that they could sort a tour to everywhere else for you for very cheap. They can be very convincing and if you bite, as I would have if not for Sam, you're get taken on a whistle stop tour of the drivers mates shops and are pressured into buying something at each and every one. There so common that you don't have to be in Bangkok long to get familiar with the red flags so they'll often politely ask early on "Is this your first day in Bangkok?".

The combined affect makes keeps you at a distance from the residents of the city. Though we met people who were genuinely kind in simple ways it is safer not to trust them or anyone else. The longer we stayed the more this feeling grew and the crack between us and the locals slowly grew into a chasm.

## Koh Phangan
The pressure to spend more and constantly wears you down and so it wasn't long before we were ready to leave Bangkok. Amongst Kev's ramblings he had told us something useful - if we got a sleeper train we could make it to the Thai islands in time for the legendary Full Moon party. So we went to the train station and bought a combined train, bus and ferry ticket and left Bangkok and settled in for a 12 hour stretch on a train.

### The boat
From my bunk on the train I watched Thailand fly past. Palm trees, towns and villages whizzed by whilst the sun set and rose again. A tinny electric voice called out our stop. The train doors opened revealing a crowd of people offering lifts to the ferry. Tired and confused some people were lured away to unmarked minibuses. Once we'd pushed through the guides and out of the platform we saw a dizzying array of different busses. More guides stood by some of the busses and tried to encourage us in. Sam spotted a bus with a name that matched our ticket, so we dived on and hoped for the best.

It was a relief when a few hours later the pier did in fact come into view and we weren't asked for more money but it was still hours yet before the boat arrived. When we'd finally made it on board we'd been travelling for 15 hours and still had hours to go. Luckily the boat had a bar.

I bought a beer off the toothless man at the counter, slipped off my shoes and settled in for the long haul. After the second beer I'd zipped my trousers down to shorts and at the fateful third or fourth I was shirtless. Comfortably tired I stared out at the sea, a stunning turquoise blue dripping with mountainous islands covered in lush green trees. The water invited you in and I couldn't wait to get to the island for a swim. But the sun blazed on and the 4 hour boat journey slipped by in no time. Only when we landed did I remember that I hadn't applied any sun protection at all.

### The Full Moon party
A little while later in our hostel and I was experiencing a sharp stinging over most of my body and was glowing red from my face to waist and knees to toes. Only where my watch and shorts had been were saved but I was probably only a few more beers away from that too. After several cold showers and a nap I woke up feeling much, much worse - shivery, dizzy, ill and desperately thirsty. I pulled on some clothes *very* carefully and stepped out into the burning late afternoon heat in search of food and water.

The hostel had a large open area filled with long wooden tables and a restaurant/bar. They were pumping out dance music overhead to get everyone ready for the full moon party but it was empty except for the two of us and a table of five drinking and painting each other. There was no way I could make it to the full moon party in this state. I could hardly get any food down me but I couldn't slate my thirst. I couldn't really concentrate and wasn't far from fainting. I should have headed to bed. Or maybe to a hospital. But the music was egging me on and the table over seemed to be a good bunch...

After a quick trip to 7/11 we were sat with the other travellers and I was equipped with another 4 litres of water, heaps of after sun and aloe vera gel, a sleeveless fluorescent top and several beers. My skin absorbed the after sun like a sponge and I was through the beer almost as fast. And suddenly I was starting to feel alot better...

On the night of every full moon Haad Rin beach is briefly populated by enterprising locals of various kinds, undercover police and thousands of tired and emotional tourists in fluorescent vests. 'FULL MOON PARTY HAAD RIN BEACH' is printed in fire from which strings of neon lights stretch down the beach past clubs booming dance music to a line of drunk men jumping over a flaming rope as it wooshes through the air. A collection of stalls stretch down 1/3 of the beach each decorated with a different countries flag. The ticket sellers had tried to mischange me on the way in and ended up given me back too much money. Rather than waste it we visited Ireland were the owner made some pouring motions behind the stall and brought out a bucket that may have contained a vodka lemonade. With nothing else to do we headed down the beach to see if someone might accidently burn themselves. As it turned out we didn't have to wait long as someone tripped over almost as soon as we could see what was happening. Unable to get out from under the rope quick enough they were caught a few times inciting a sympathetic 'aah'-ing  from the crowd but then quickly forgotten.

The rope was put away and replaced by a ring attached by a rope at each end, held up and lit on fire. Fumes poured off it and into the night sky. A few hundred people crowded around the fire keeping a respectful distance from the heat. Every now and then someone would muster the confidence to sprint out from the crowd and dive through. We must have looked like members of some lost fluorescent tribe, performing some ancient ritual to prove our courage. We started at the edge of the crowd but slowly, crept closer to the front. Almost unwillingly pulled towards the flames. My heart was pounding as I arrived at the leading edge. All eyes were on the fire and whoever was running at it. There was a pause for a moment. I ran and jumped. I felt the heat brush over me as I passed through and landed - unburnt. *Phew*. Moments later Sam made it through too. Well at least we don't need to do that again.

The second time we were a little more confident. Sam went first and ran towards the ring. As he jumped one of the men pulled the rope a little more taut. He fell into the burning ring of fire and went down, down, down hitting the bottom of the ring with his leg and dragging his arm through it as he went. 

I don't remember exactly what I said but I think it was something along the lines of: 'Ah. Bollocks.'.

### Some clinc
A young woman was rushed in on a stretcher. She wasn't moving. The doctor grabbed her head and shined a bright torch into her eyes as they rolled her urgently behind a curtain at the back of the clinic. With it's bright fluorescent lights and white decor it stuck out like a sore thumb against the colourful bars of the strip. It wasn't our first choice for where to spend the evening. It wasn't even our first choice of places to treat the burn. We'd tried to soothe it by washing it in an outside tap next to a toilet at first but the owner of the toilets had made us stop once they'd seen us. We found the clinic a little after with the help of some taxi drivers. People arrived with various ailments. Some fairly serious, one just looking for a lost friend. When it was Sams turn it was just a few bandages and a bill and we were gone. We weren't around long enough to see if the girl got to leave.

### The morning after
The fire had aggravated the sun burn and my shoulders had developed stinging blisters. I alternated between feeling sorry for myself in the shower and in bed. First a long cold shower and then lieing with cold, wet towel compresses until those were stinging hot and then back in the shower taking the towels with me to cool them down again. Luckily Koh Phangan has several well stocked clinics on account of the many, many accidents that occur on the island so it was very cheap and easy to buy second degree burn cream which did help a little. But we still lived like vampires for the rest of our time on Koh Phangang. Cowering from the sun during the day in our air conditioned rooms pnly leaving to explore the town once it had cooled down in the evening.

The people we met outside of the party were friendlier than in Bangkok and seemed fairly normal. In the market, though you could still haggle on the prices I didn't feel like they were trying to rip me off so I usually didn't worry. We found a pool bar that we would spend the evenings in where we could turn up and play a few games with the owner and some of the regulars whilst sipping on an orange juice. No alcohol so as not to dehydate the skin any further. Despite the burning pain, Koh Phangang was on the whole a much more pleasant place to be than Bangkok.

The hostel we were staying in had been deserted after the full moon party so one morning I took several painkillers and hauled my backpack onto my blistered shoulders and we walked through the roasting sun to Smile Hostel which is a bit further out of town. The way there seemed mostly abandoned aside from the odd shop selling wine bottles filled with fuel for mopeds and dodgy massage parlours. Our hostel was well hidden down a dirt side track. The only giveaway was a sign with a disconcerting smiley face leaning out from down the road. Despite first impressions the hostel was pretty good. Clean with friendly owners, a remarkably chilled out dog and blessedly powerful air conditioning.

That evening once it had started to cool down we ventured out. We headed into town, had an excellent massaman curry from a restaurant on the high street, played some more pool and then started the long trek back. About halfway home as we were nearing the abandoned stretch we could hear the trembling tones of a Thai man singing badly into a mic. The kind of awful singing typical of a karaoke bar. The building was down a dirt road and was decorated with pink fairly lights and had a tall sign with text in Thai. Outside a few big jeeps were parked. It didn't look like your typical karaoke bar but the door pushed open without any resistance and we stepped through into a dimly lit room with a bar at the opposite end. I took a step towards the bar but stopped when I saw there wasn't anyone behind it. The wailing was louder in here but seemed to be coming from a speaker on the wall and as I looked around for a stage I only saw dozens of surprised looking Thai woman sitting staring at us. No one moved for a moment. Then at once - me and Sam dived for the door as the girls jumped to their feet to stop us. Don't go! Stay a while, have a drink - we'll show you a good time! We burst outside into the clear air with our money if not our dignity and walked away layghing. 

As it turned out the deserted street before our hostel was actually the red light district which creeks alive at night. It always appeared busy but it is mostly bored young Thai escorts with a scattering of odd older men lingering around buying them drinks. Pink fairly lights are hung outside all the bars wherever one might find a companion for the evening. We crossed through the district a few times and everytime I always heard that same Thai man singing.

After a few days with the sunburn my legs began to swell so much that my feet would fill my boots and I was unable to stand for long. My nipples would also slowly inflate as soon as I'd left the shower so that by the end of the day I'd developed a respectable pair of man boobs. If I'd done my hair right I may have even been able find employment in one of the cheaper bars but we were more pressed for time than money at this point and having run out of things to do at night on Koh Phangang we hid from the sun inside a boat to the mainland and flew north to Chiang Mai and shortly over to Pai.

## Pai
### A dirty business
There are two kinds of toilets in Thailand. There are your western style which is what we're used too. Big porcelain seat with a hole in the middle half filled with water. Then there are the squat toilets which are more like flat blocks of porcelain with slightly curved sides and a drain at one end. In south east Asia both types of toilets will have toilet paper and an odd looking water pistol hanging on the wall which up to now I'd figured was for cleaning the toilet. The toilets in Chiang Mai bus station are of the squat variety which I'd so far managed to avoid but as we arrived I'd realised that the late night out the previous night had put my stomach into a state of distress akin to the cold war - and things could go nuclear at any time. Worse there was no toilet paper or any sign there had ever been any toilet paper. I left, did some quick research and went back in. Crisis averted, I reached for the water pistol, the bum gun, and squeezed the trigger causing water to shoot out at an alarming rate. A very gently touch resulted in a more approachable water stream, more like a tap than a firehose. I have to say it was an unusual experience but I did leave feeling squeaky clean.

### A slice of Pai
Apparently the road between Chiang Mai and Pai has 762 turns but personally I think there's probably more. The road curves and drops like a rollercoaster track for two long hours. It's so bad that if you keep your eyes open you'll sometimes see signs denoting safe places for drivers to stop to vomit. But it's all worth it when you come rolling down to the outskirts of the town to see the sun set behind endless fields of rice. We rolled up a bridge and for a moment I could see into the fields where two farmers were toiling away in long clothes and pointed hats and far away a few lonesome trees watching over the rice. 

Lit by the setting sun, the high street looked pretty idyllic at first. Mopeds sort of dawdled down the street rather than darting and everything had a bit more room to breathe. I found a street food stand selling a delicious and massive piece of grilled chicken and decided I was going to like this place. Sadly, like the chicken, it didn't last too long and once the night came the high street filled up with stalls selling crepes, smoothies and random tat. More people arrived and the street went from quaint to cramped.

Aswell as people and shops the high street is home to many dogs. General indifference towards animals has meant dogs probably first bought as guards or pets have bred. Now there are many street dogs about who get little or no friendly human contact. The ones on the main street are fairly safe but in the wider area they can be aggressive. Some form packs and roam about when it's cool out. After the high street started to fill up we left to find somewhere to eat a proper meal. Heading back we turned down an alley and met a little dog who started barking at us. Then there were two dogs, one a bit larger and with flat ears. Then moments later some 5 or 6 dogs of all shapes and sized were following us and growling, barking and nipping at our legs whilst we walked frantically away. 

That said, most of the dogs I met were appreciative of a bit of human contact. I met one dog, white with a brown head and soft eyes, who after a few scratches behind the ear and a bit of attention happily slept at my feet for a while and tried to follow us home that night. I walked her back thinking that she must have been someones pet but when I went to the shop I'd met her at the owner looked at me like she'd just chased a rat outside I'd dragged it back in for her. She was a good dog but they're pests here not pets. She sat outside after that and watched me go but didn't follow me back. But it was probably for the best, I'd never have got her through customs.

### When I get my moped out on the road...
The attractions around Pai are well spread out so the typical thing to do is to rent a moped for a day or two and make your own tour. We'd been tempted to try it on Koh Phangang but had been put off by the high death rate there. Pai was quieter but it still meant joining the stream of traffic that flows around the town and having never driven anything bigger than a go kart I was not confident. Worse still the weather turned on us leaving us waiting in the rental office with far too much time to observe the people around us. We were sat opposite a girl who was in crutches and had a bandaged face and arms after she'd flipped her moped trying to dodge a dog. Many people came back with bad scratches or burns on their legs. A couple turned up on one moped before one of them fell into the others arms crying and I was close to wussing out. But then the weather, still working against us, cleared up.

The two of us were balanced on the back of a moped and were driven down a muddy alley to a small house. A huge pig lay on it's side under a wooden shelter surrounded by strutting chickens. To the side of the house was a small paved area. We were shown how to start and stop the moped, where to put the fuel and drove a few unsteady circles around the paved bit each way. And then we were let loose on the road. 

The first twenty minutes were nerve racking but once you get out of the town and away from all the traffic the mopeds were pretty easy to drive. In fact without any gears to worry about they weren't that far off the go karts I'd driven before. Other than a minor incident were I drove into a ditch and ended up horizontally on a blind corner things went off without a hitch and they let us see the many splendid sights around Pai. Scooting around from place to place was definitely one of the better things we did and as long as your very careful or lucky it's pretty safe. 

Sadly it was not all great. One of the spots I'd been keen to see was a small elephant riding centre. It's described in guides like it's a little old ladies house with some elephants on the side you can go and see and feed. When we rolled up a mahout was riding an elephant towards us. On it's back a carriage carrying two people rolled gently from side to side. At a distance it was a pretty majestic sight. Off the side of the road was a small enclosure. Two elephants stood nearby, sometimes shaking their heads from side to side but otherwise still. A woman was stood at the edge of the enclosure trying to lure an elephant over with a piece of fruit but it just stood and stared at her. A mahout inside noticed and went over to the elephant. The man held out it's ear and held a cigarette lighter to it to drive the elephant firwards despite everyones protests. Then the elephant reached out without vigor and gently pulled the fruit out of the womans hand. It looked at us with big, hopeless eyes and passed the fruit too it's mouth. Unable to stand it we drove away.

### Laap
Before we left Pai I wanted to try some proper Northern Thai meals. Up north they like their meat. So much so that many of the traditional meals can be served cooked or raw for those who just can't wait. I'd had a glimpse of this with the chicken when I arrived but outside of one or two excellent street food stands, most of the high street sustenance is pretty poor or worse - vegetarian. The really good stuff is out of town. I read about Larp Khom Huay Poo online but it place took me nearly an hour to find and was so small I managed to walk past it once and then enter the wrong building on the second try. It's hidden out towards the air field and it's tiny menu consists of variants of the typical northern Thai dish and mythical meat salad Laap, a so spicy it'll make your eyes leak, pile of minced pork fried with mounds of fresh green herbs. It puts all other salads to shame and cost me around £2. It was glorious and a good meal to have in me as we prepared for the 762 turns once more.

## Chiang Mai
Back in Chiang Mai things were mostly as we had left them. Sheltered down a side street, Brick House hostel was an accident waiting to happen. It had three stories of rooms overlooking a swimming pool and a bar but where whisky was cheaper than water. The bar there was run by a slightly manic Thai man who laughed whenever he didn't understand what someone had said. Sadly he couldn't mix a simple drink. Try as he might he would always end up making very complex ones. Whatever you asked for he would always add a little extra flourish. Maybe by floating a candle in your cocktail bucket or slicing an orange peel into the shape of a love heart. It was a habit that drove one friend, who we'll call Scot, there mad as he always snuck a bit of lemon into his SangSom (rum) and redbull. Yet whenever he asked about it the bartender would just laugh and laugh.

### My 23rd Birthday

### A walk in a park
I'd always planned to ride an elephant once in Thailand but once we got here we found out about the breaking process where young elephants are removed from their family, tied up and tortured until their spirit is broken. What we'd seen in Pai just cemented the issue. But finding somewhere that respects and cares for the animals is not easy. Most camps use ethics to one up each other. You'll find leaflets all over Thailand featuring big 'No riding!' banners across them like it's a feature rather than a principle. None of them will tell you anything about what they are fed or where they sleep. So your left too rely on others experiences so in the end we went for the highest rated park on TripAdvisor and dropped £150 each on a day at Elephant Nature Park.

The arrival to Elephant Nature Park (ENP) was not as I had expected. The last stretch is along a dirt path through a dense jungle flanked by all kinds of riding camps, big and small, all cramped so tight together it's hard to say where one begins and the other ends. ENP is no exception. Our tour was actually in an adjacent camp that had previously been a riding camp but had converted to the ENP model.

We first saw the elephants that we'd be following through a wooden fence. There were two huge females, the mother and a nanny, and a young boy called Cookie who was just a little smaller than me. Just out of their reach sat several buckets of sliced pumpkin, watermelon and bannanas. The elephants stood, Cookie impatiently, and looked at us expectantly. Hesistantly I held out a chunk of pumpkin to the little guy who wrapped his long, dextrous trunk around the fruit, squeezing it as he did so that juices spilled out before passing it to his mouth and unrolling his trunk again ready to receive more. He ate so fast it took two people to keep him happy.

We were armed with a bandolier of fruit and sent through the fence to lead the elephants down towards the forest where they would be able to roam for a while. We walked ahead with the grown ups whilst Cookie followed behind chasing after a football, at least until he stepped on it and popped it like a grape, then he just followed the food again. At first it's intimidating being followed by an animal twice your size and hundreds of times your weight but it doesn't take long for you to acclimatise to them. Very quickly you find yourself strolling along besides elephants like it's the most ordinary thing in the world. So when someone said you can jump in the river after the elephants I ran at it and made a best effort to clear the bank. Then I turned around as the matriarch raised herself to her full height, slowly and with no effort but moving such a great mass that water poured off of her. She looked down at me curiously and I looked up in total awe at her sheer size. We stayed like that for the longest moment. Then she relaxed her head and broke the spell and was transformed back into your everyday two tonne land mammal.

Once we neared the end of the path the elephants split off and strolled through the thick foliage without us, their great mass allowing them to push through it with ease. After a moment a tremendous trumpeting noise echoed through the forest as they called to each other. We stopped, had some lunch by a waterfall and then turned about and headed back. Picking the elephants up again on the way back. 

After the walk we had a quick tour of the rest of the park and met some of the other elephants aswell as heaps of dogs - it was good to see some being properly cared for. It was an amazing experience and we could feel good about it too, confident that the elephants were being well looked after.

### Big Night Out
Back at the hostel the bar was fairly quiet but there were still some good friends there to go out with including Scot. I went and saw my favourite bartender, bought a beer, and told him it was my birthday. He said he'd make something special. 15 minutes later he had constructed a pyramid six glasses high and poured several kinds of liquor into the bottom 6 with some roasted coffee beans for good measure. Because this wasn't elaborate enough he then poured more clear liquor into the top glass so that it flowed like a fountain down into the bottom glasses and lit the whole thing on fire. After all that it wasn't the nicest drink, it tasted like a coffee but had the texture of a milkshake, but it was very strong. By the time we had managed to get all those down us we were starting to run out of time. Since the military took control of the government they'd been a midnight curfew in place.

#### 

#### 22:00 - 2 hours till curfew
It seemed like your bog standard night club if a bit quiet. Dark, hot and sweaty with generic music pumping out from overhead. The club was empty at first but filled out faster than the free shots ran out leaving us stranded in a sea of people desperately trying to maintain a circle so we could show off our very limited moves. other than Sam who mastered dad dancing at a very young age. After a few expeditions to the bar the lights were turned up and the music dimmed. In the corner a door had been opened that had been hidden in the dark. A bright light shone out of it 

#### 00:00 - Curfew
An uncharacteristically enthusiastic crowd rushed at the exit and the space and relatively cold air of the night only to find ourselves in a well lit cafe which happened to also sell drinks and pump out load music. Our Scottish friend had already made it to the bar and was chatting up the bartender. There was an array of CCTV screens on the wall the middle of which displayed some stragglers in the last room. On another police had just rolled in behind the club and were setting up a barrier. They moved seamlessly from one screen to the other and sent the stragglers out down the street. I waited for them to come storming in. Back on the CCTV the two police officers had packed up and left. So much for the curfew.

#### 02:00 - 2 hours after curfew
We left the cafe before it closed, which is a shame because I would have been fascinated to find out how you shut down a well lit nightclub - do they turn off the lights? Our Scottish pal had spent all his money tipping the bartender so we headed out to find a cash point and somewhere else to go. Some tuk-tuk drivers were still cautiously prowling the streets but it was eerily quiet. We didn't hang around. Scott led us to a sketchy looking warehouse. The entrance sat half way up the building up metal stairs. The bouncer smiled broadly at us, nodding as we went in. It was so dark inside you had to feel your way to the bar. Dotted around the club were silhouettes of wide men and groups of what could have been women. The night grew tired and the day started to rise. Then the lights flicked on and illuminated a room filled with ladyboys. Turned out our friend had taken us to the club the working girls go to blow off steam at the end of the night. We headed back - but left without Scott.

### YAMA - Yet Another Morning After
I stumbled downstairs and up too the bar in search of water but found the laughing bartenders mysterious 'herbal remedy' instead. It tasted of burning. Feeling chirpier I headed out the alley of our hostel through steam from a noodle soup stand opposite which a family sat at a plastic table eating their breakfast whilst their child played on a tablet. Flies buzzed faintly nearby. The smell of grilled pork drew me in down the street towards the best grilled meat stand in the city and finally out onto the main street where I tried unsuccesfully to take it all in. All the tall buildings and vehicles of unfamiliar shapes, and the kind of plants you only see in garden centres at home. All too much for my slightly beer addled mind. Kitted out with a plastic bag of grilled pork and my laundry I set out to find someone who could wash it.

After half an hour of wandering around town unsuccesfully I came across a quiet bridge over a busy road. Halfway across lay a ma. His skin was tanned too leather from too many hours in the sun. His bare top showed skin pulled tight against his ribs. I couldn't tell if he was breathing. He had a small plastic watch on his wrist so I just kept walking. There was clearly something up. Further he was the only homeless person I'd seen since arriving in Thailand so somehow he must have managed to exclude himself from society. No one else was helping him so they likely knew something I didn't. It was a scam. I almost convinced myself enough to make it across but I couldn't shake the thought. I turned back and folded a little money inside one of my t-shirts and left it near his head for if he woke up.



### Welcome to the jungle
Before we left Chiang Mai we found a local guide to lead us on a trek through a jungle north of the city. He arrived carrying a machete and a very practical backpack filled with kit for all weathers. Whilst the route wasn't crazy complicated, and I still contend we could have managed it without him, he added a lot of value to the trek. As we went he pointed out all sorts of things that we would have never discovered by ourselves. Like a plant whose leaves retreated when you touched them and many waterfalls and villages and rice paddies that were hidden away. He was also very handy when the weather caught up with us when he managed to prepare a fire, make a cover for both our bags and ourselves and sort us a good meal - complete with tea - whilst thunder rumbled around us.

So I was a bit shocked when after Sam mentioned that we'd been to Elephant Nature Park and our guide described a very different park to the one I'd seen. He claimed that the methods used to control the elephants there were the same as any of the other camps and it's success was because it had managed to capitalise on the idea of ethical practices but this was mostly an illusion. He claimed the camp was too cramped for the number of elephants being kept there, that he'd seen elephants fight and die as a result and that elephants were being underfed but this was being hidden by injecting them with growth hormones like you might cattle. 

At first I rejected his comments out of hand. What he'd said seemed ridiculous... But there had been things that I'd tried to ignore. From the bus journey there till the moment we left they'd pushed their narrative hard. That most camps were cruel and that ENP was making lives better for abused elephants. Yet buying animals that cannot be used any longer elsewhere does nothing to prevent more from being broken into service. But it is cheaper than buying healthy ones. ENP was converting as many of the surrounding camps into clones of itself like a franchise. This seemed to make sense at the time, those camps won't be buying elephants and so the demand for them will go down. But what would happen if it succeeded and the demand for elephants collapsed. Would ENP and all it's franchises shutdown? The model is only sustainable as long as they don't really believe they can succeed.

I was tired of being exploited. Everyone wanted your money, which is fair enough, but it would be nice if people at least had the decency to be honest about it. At this point it would have been better to be mugged - at least they wouldn't have tried to dress it up at all.

As your outside of the community your not a person, just a paycheque. It's only important to keep up appearences so that the tourists keep arriving. Once they get there it doesn't matter what happens so long as it doesn't put anyone off visiting. So long as more people keeping passing through. Everything ends up optimised around that idea. 

You don't want to keep people around anywhere for a long time because if people do they might spot the details and give away the trick. 

If you put up signs to read at historical sites then people will stay longer, the queues will get longer and people might avoid them. Tour guides can keep people moving plus and it lets you wring a little more money out of the bodies passing through.

Who cares if a traveller gets their stuff stolen, or crashes a moped or is burnt on a beach! They'll be gone in a few days anyway and more will have come in.

This was nearly my permanent impression of Thailand - but then I found God.

### Chiang Khong
God, as it turns out, is a small gay Thai man who runs a hostel with their partner in Chiang Khong, Thailand. He wasn't extra-ordinary in any way. The only miracle he performed whilst we were there was producing an endless supply of lukewarm beer. He was just a friendly, open guy with an excellent name who happens to live in a curious little town.

Chiang Khong sits on the Thai/Laos border so before the bridge was built that connects the two it was a convenient stopping point for travellers crossing the border. Now without any special attractions the town is gradually fading back off the map. This leaves it in a rare position, very accessible yet just off the beaten path. 

As we arrived a man pulled over on his moped and asked us if we were looking for a hostel. He surprised me at first because he was clearly English, possibly a northerner. But with my scam filter set high I told him that we'd already arranged for somewhere to stay and we were fine thanks. The polite way of saying bugger off. 

God and the other people we met in Chiang Khong was a reminder that we'd only seen a tiny portion of Thailand and that part was so well travelled that it is going to harden people against foreigners. The things I'd expected to see where dissapointing because they had been aggressively optimised for profit. Whilst the best parts of the trip had been all of the little things that I hadn't been prepared for and hadn't been looking for. So as I looked across the river I resolved to get off the beaten path wherever I could and I was cautiously optimistic about what waited to be found in Laos. 

To be a tourist is to go somewhere to see something you know is there but to travel is to go somewhere and see what you might find.  

To have come half way around the world and expect to be accomodated for, having learnt none of the language and knowing little of the culture outside of the big differences.