Day 0
I'm writing this at about 20 to midnight. I ate my last meal just under 5 hours ago and if all goes to plan I won't eat another meal for about 5 days. This isn't the first time I've tried a fast but it will be the longest so far. Usually I'd be feeling fairly confident at the moment but unfortunately I made the mistake of telling people I was planning on doing it and so now I've locked myself in. The next 8 hours should be easy, after that things get more interesting.

Day 1
This morning I had a multivitamin for breakfast, water for lunch and it'll be sleep for dinner. So far I've been fairly consistently hungry with the occasional pang that anyone who's ever skipped a meal will be familiar with. But whilst they always seems persistent at first the pangs go away after about an hour or so and it's tolerable after that. Really the worse thing is the persistent nagging desire to eat and when that's not satisfied to move or work or do something - anything. It's a quiet voice at the moment but insistent.

There are some beneficial points that I had forgotten about. Usually after a days work I'd be pretty tired, at least mentally and my body would usually follow suit. After not eating anything for over 24 hours I've got a lot more energy available all round. The extra energy is making it easier to plow on with other tasks I've been putting off. Admittedly I am getting distracted fairly easily but it is hard to say if it is any worse than usual.

Day 2
Things are overall a little better today. Other than a little queasiness/dizzyness in the morning. The hungry itch has died down a bit also. I was perhaps thinking about food every minute or so yesterday and that's improved to about 5-10 minutes on average. Overall focus has improved on yesterday; I maybe have a slight bit less energy than then but still more than average. The downside is it's hard to switch off and the hours seem to drag on by. Maybe if you feel your life is going by too fast you can try fasting - it'll be the longest 50 days of your life.